Microsoft Word Macro
The Microsoft Word macro may be one
of the oldest and best-known
client-side software attack vectors.
Microsoft Office applications like Word
and Excel allow users to embed macros,
a series of commands and instructions
that are grouped together to
programmatically accomplish a task.
Organizations often use macros
to manage dynamic content
and link documents with external content.
More interestingly, macros can
be written from scratch
in Visual Basic for Applications or VBA,
which is a fully functioning
scripting language
with full access to ActiveX objects
and the Windows Script Host, similar
to JavaScript in HTML Applications.
Creating a Microsoft Word macro is as
simple as choosing the VIEW ribbon
and selecting Macros.
To begin, we enter a name for the macro.
When we click Create,
a simple macro framework
will be inserted into our document.
Let’s examine our simple macro
and discuss the fundamentals
of Visual Basic for Applications.
The main procedure
used in our VBA macro
begins with the “Sub” keyword
and ends with “End Sub”.
This essentially marks the
body of our macro.
At this point, our new macro, MyMacro
is simply an empty procedure and several
lines beginning with an apostrophe,
which are comments.
To invoke the Windows Scripting
Host through ActiveX as we did earlier,
we can use the CreateObject function along
with the Wscript.Shell Run method,
which we will insert into our macro.
Since Office macros are not
executed automatically,
we must make use of two predefined
procedures, namely the AutoOpen procedure,
which is executed when a new document is
opened, and Document Open,
which is executed when an already-open
document is re-opened.
Both of these procedures can call our
custom procedure and run our code.
We must save the containing document as
either .docm or the older .doc format
which supports embedded macros, but
must avoid the .docx format
which does not support them.
When we reopen the document
containing our macro,
we will be presented with
a security warning,
indicating that macros
have been disabled.
In order to run the macro, the default
security setting of Microsoft Office
dictates that we must
click Enable Content.
While macros can certainly be disabled in
an attempt to guard against this attack,
they are often enabled as they are
commonly used in most environments.
Once we click Enable Content,
the macro will execute and a
command prompt will open.
If the user does not click Enable
Content, the attack will fail.
To overcome this, the victim must be
unaware of the potential consequences
or be sufficiently encouraged by the
presentation of the document
to click this button.
As with the initial HTML Application,
command execution is a start,
but a reverse shell would
be much better.
To that end, we will once
again turn to PowerShell
and reuse the ability to execute
our Metasploit shellcode
using a Base64-encoded string.
To make this happen, we will declare
a variable, Dim, of type String
containing the PowerShell
command we wish to execute.
We will add a line to reserve space for
our string variable in our macro:
We could embed the base64-encoded
PowerShell script as a single String,
but VBA has a 255-character
limit for literal strings.
This restriction does not apply
to strings stored in variables,
so we can split the command into
multiple lines and concatenate them.
We will use a simple Python
script to split our command.
We will paste the Powershell
code from the .hta file
we created earlier
in this module.
And save our script.
Now we’ll run our script and
pipe the output it into xclip
to send the split powershell
command to our clipboard.
Having split the Base64 encoded
string into smaller chunks,
we can update and
execute our exploit.
But first let’s re-establish
our netcat listener.
Then edit our macro again.
Saving the Word document,
closing it, and reopening it will
automatically execute the macro.
Notice that the macro security
warning only re-appears
if the name of the
document is changed.
In our Netcat listener, we see
that the macro works flawlessly,
And results in a working reverse shell.
Excellent.